Is Admiral Redfield still alive? Yes. Is he
somewhere around this area? Yes, he is. Lives
right up here. Wonderful person. I want to go see
him. Okay. All right. You're at Pearl Harbor,
then? At Pearl Harbor. This is at Pearl Harbor in
the spring of 1944. Having been sent there as a
representative of the Bureau of Ships to offer my
services to Commander Submarine's Pacific Fleet
in largely in connection with the bath
demographic, but in any way one can be useful. This
entailed one or two trips, side trips, to Midway to
catch submarines there. There was a large number
of submarines at Pearl. What I tried to do was to see
as many people as I could to
distribute
Really, it was an educational trip, both for them
and for us. And I tried to report pretty regularly
back to both the Woods Hole and to Revell in
Washington to let them know what we might be able to
do better.
Admiral Lockwood was sub-pac.
His assistant operations officer was then
Commander Grenfell, who was the most senior
oceanographer, who was the most senior submarine
man I had had any long acquaintance with because he
had been involved in the Bureau of Ships in
Washington.
I would like to relate one discussion I had with
Admiral Grenfell when I arrived out there. And
incidentally, I had great respect for Grenfell
then and have continued to over the many years that
I have known him as being a man who works very hard
for his boys, the submarine people. Well, when I
got out there, I looked up Grenfell and said,
Commander, I'd like very much to have you listen to
what I have to say because I don't know very much
about submarines, and I know that I know a great
deal more about than any of my bosses did in
Washington or at Woods Hole, and when I give them a
line of patter in the Atlantic, that's one thing,
but when you talk to them at Pearl or Midway when
they're about to start out on a patrol, one feels a
little bit more serious. Well, Grenfell listened
for a little while, and then He said, Alan, I
wouldn't really worry very much. He said, first, I
think most of what you have to say makes pretty good
sense. And for the rest of it, I think
oceanography, the rest of it, I think submarine
people are smart enough not to pay any attention to
it. Well, many times since, when I have been giving
a talk or something like that, and my nerve has kind
of wavered, I remember what Grenfell have said.
said, and felt, you're talking to adults. You tell
them what you think they ought to know, and let them
make up their own mind. Well, this general sense
prevailed in Pearl Harbor. We took many manuals
with us,
and we had a magnificent opportunity to teach. And
this was real teaching. One of the things we
quickly found out was you go through the ship,
inspect their apparatus, and see if it was
working, and if not, do whatever was necessary to
get the people on the beach to fix anything that you
couldn't. Then you go to the junior officer and
find out what reports he had, a piece of paper he had
to do with the bath thermograph. And you might find
that he had not all very little, or you might find
that he had a lot of junk that was obsolete, and you
could help him throw it away. One of the most
important things you could do was to get stuff off
the ship. Then, if somebody was going out on
patrol, you seldom knew exactly what they were
doing, because... People like technicians were
not cleared for such information unless what they
were working on affected
the expedition very much. But you quickly found
out that after the captain knew where he was sent,
Then you sit down with he and his sonar officer and
by this time you knew the month that was involved.
You knew the general area either from what he sort
of blocked it out or which particular areas that he
was paying the most attention to. Then you could
take a red grease pencil, and you could start
circling the few paragraphs in a thick document
that might really affect him. You could circle,
indicate the graphs. You were doing him the most
favor if you tore all the other pages out of the book
and threw them away, and then wrote about a
one-page addendum that would be most pertinent
for him and what he sometimes felt was his
particular way that he liked to make an attack or
some such thing as this.
Brevity, brevity, brevity, and fundamentalism,
because these were smart people. And if you could
give them the principle of what you were after,
they were apt to, about a half of them or a third of
them would do very well.
As I've said earlier, these were the people that at
later dates and later jobs, they were some of the
best friends that oceanography and science ever
had. Over the years, they frequently had much
higher standards for oceanography than the
oceanographers themselves. And many times when
we used their submarines, whether they were
operational officers on the staffs who were there
running the submarines themselves. They went
beyond the call of duty to see that things got done.
Well, we come to
the end of the war. And here, of course, it was the
end of the war in the Pacific that counted, because
in the submarine navy, it was almost entirely the
Pacific.
This was a period, of course, in which We visited
quite a few of the laboratories. The Navy
laboratories, oceanographic laboratories were
involved in a good deal of touring around amongst
each other's laboratories, helping each other
out. The cooperation was wonderful.
Let me short one thing here. You have three papers
that really come out of this submarine work in
1946, don't you? Yes. Okay. Well... The one on
underwater photography comes out in 1946. Yes.
And then two that come out on the submarines. I
think this was from data you collected here at
Woodrow? Most of the work that was... Most of the
submarine work that was done never really came out
as a report except it came out most in the
summary... In the technical reports, in the bound
technical reports that the NDRC published at the
end of the war, these have been declassified.
There aren't very many of them around. We took the
general trend that, in my own case,
it seemed like it was a better thing not to publish
too much of that stuff. Because when you make
friends with a few hundred people in the silent
service, you develop a tendency to respect their
general thoughts and way of operation.
The sound channel work and some of the acoustics
work that was done done by Ewing and Warzel, of
which I was in on much in the beginning, but only the
periphery at the end. These were things which
really the Navy wasn't particularly interested
in at the end of the war, because they felt it was not
important to anti-submarine warfare work and so
forth. So that was published rather quickly.
At the end of the war,
Project Crossroads the concept of testing of
these new nuclear devices came along. Revell was a
great ringleader in that in Washington. And for
the Bikini tests in the summer of 46, Project
Crossroads, quite a large number of
oceanographers got out there. In fact, at one
time, there were about 40 people from Woods Hole
Many of these were hired for the job on
radiological safety work. But my involvement was
largely through Revell, but it was with a wave
measurement group in which we were trying to see
how high the waves would be that were caused by the
atomic blast, both the air blast and the
underwater blast.
From Woods Hole, an engineer, Otis Hunt, who
worked with me on instruments, went. Sever
Harlow, who was a mechanic
over at the Marine Biological Laboratory and quit
to go out with us. He also was a very junior sailor
mechanic at the time the NC boats flew across the
Atlantic. So He was interested in this sort of
thing. And John Parkinson, who was sort of a junior
Harvard classmate of Columbus's and had been a DE
skipper during the war, and he felt it would be very
interesting to see this bomb and its effects. We
were attached to the submarine tender Fulton out
in Pearl and to go out to Bikini. They worked very
hard getting ready with our equipment, which our
primary equipment consisted of about a dozen
instruments which we called turtles that were
steel cases with recording clocks and pressure
gauges that would basically try and measure the
height of the wave that passed over them.
The important part of these instruments, where
they were completely self-contained. There was
no electronics associated with them. And we felt
that they might not give the best data in the world,
but they would give data. And knowing that so many
things could go wrong, we felt that was important.
On the Fulton, they had a variety of people from
other laboratories. I was particularly
interested to get to know better people like John
Isaacs from Scripps and then at the University of
California and Scripps, who were measured in the
wave measurement group. This whole thing has
slowed up a little bit because just after we sailed
from California, we received word that the tests
were going to be postponed for about a month.
Rather than turning around and going back with all
the confusion, I decided to stay out in Pearl for
that time, as most of the others. This gave us a
chance to give some proper testing to our
apparatus, which had received only a disgraceful
small amount of testing before we left Woods Hole.
And it also gave me a chance to... go to the
submarine base and see what the chances were of
continuing some of the tests on particularly the
submerged performance characteristics of
submarines. We had done a bit of this during the
war, which came about because really
of the density layers. We would tell submarines
that a dense layer would amount to a ton, and some of
them would laugh and say, but we have other
problems with our boats, which are much more
important than that. And it was very clear that
they had no document that told them how their
submarine operated underwater. They had no sets
of curves or vertical motions. vertical turning
circles, things like this. And much of their
folklore was very good. Much of their folklore was
very bad. And it was extremely difficult for
junior officers to learn to dive their boat
quickly because they had no sound, reasonably
sound, even thumb rules to go by. This was a little
flabbergasting. to us. We'd run into it early and
did some things about it. In fact, we helped the
Ascania Regulator Company make modifications to
the submarine diving trainer so they could put
temperature gradients into the fictitious ocean
which these submarine trainers
dove into.
Of the kinds of things we were interested in here
was,
could a submarine sit on a density layer? For
example, if they lost all power in the war zone,
would they have to surface and surrender or shoot
it out when they were outgunned a hundredfold or
surrender, or would they Let her sink to the
bottom, or might they be able to set out on a density
layer? And we had experiments. One of the first
ones was on the darter, in
which we got the submarine skipper to get a stop
trim at periscope depth, flood in about a ton of
water when he was dead in the water, and let it sink.
At that time, we had a density. fairly good thermal
layer at about 180 feet. All the time we were
sinking, the way the crew was trying to lay bets
with you is how high would you bet that the
submarine would stop when it hit the density layer
or keep on sinking. And we had a good density layer.
It was just like falling into a feather bed. But the
nice thing that it showed was that we only exceeded
the neutral depth by about 10 or 12 feet. And this
was one of the early tests that showed us that the
submarines could rely on this density layer.
We did other tests like this, one on the batfish, in
which we flooded in water at about, flooded in
about 5,000 pounds at periscope depth when we were
stopped to see how rapidly we would fall. And a
submarine has a lot of resistance when you try and
push it sideways. So you really have a couple of
minutes, even though you're perhaps 10,000
pounds heavy, a submarine without any propulsion
at all, if it is dead in the water, has one and a half
or two minutes before it gets to collapse depth. So
if a skipper can take advantage of this extra time
and find out what is wrong with a submarine,
then he may be able to fix something or have a bright
idea before he
gets into real extremis and before he surfaces,
which is one of the most dangerous things they can
do. Well, this particular time on the Batfish was
very interesting because it tells something
about the submarine operator's character. The
captain turned the dive over to me, and we fell
gracefully and smoothly, taking the date as we
went, down to about 200 feet. And then we went down
to about
300 feet.
The data was coming along very well, and I had about
all I wanted. I sort of indicated to the captain
that he could take over, and he indicated, no, keep
going. So we got down to test depth, and then we went
a little bit deeper, and I figured there's no point
in playing chicken with that particular
commanding officer. So in a loud, clear voice, I
said, Captain, the test is satisfactorily
completed. I turn the boat back over to you. And the
captain, quick as a wink, picked up the general
communication system in the submarine. And as
part of his education program, he said, attention
all hands. Our visiting scientist oceanographer
friend,
he said, now that we are past test depth, 8,000
pounds heavy, dead in the water, falling past test
depth our oceanographer scientist friend has
turned the submarine back to the captain I thank
him blow safety well this was a magnificent
opportunity the captain wanted everybody on the
ship to know the status he had been advising them so
that when he blew safety and we started going back
up again they could say hey Everybody
on the ship would know that this was something
which was foreseen, predictable, and when it
happened, it was something they could count on in
the future.
We're back out at Operations Crossroads at Pearl
Harbor while we were waiting for Operations
Crossroads.
Captain Grenfell had by this time become a captain
of squadron commander, and he turned the boat over
to us for about a week to go out and do testing of what
we would do each morning. We would...
We would do testing of free falls, such things, and
such things as telling how much the boat would tilt
as people moved back and forth in it, and trying to
quantify the motions of the boat underwater. And
then in the afternoon, we would plan everything so
the battery would be run pretty well dead by late
afternoon. And we would try and see what
combinations of bow and stern planes would give
what diving characteristics, how quickly one
could pull out of deep dives, high angles, and so
forth. Perhaps the most important part about this
was not that the tests themselves, because they
were fairly simple and fundamental, but the
report was written up In one week, the report was
written up, duplicated, and sent out to every
submarine in the Pacific Fleet. So this was an
indication of the fact that communication was
working. In this discussion of submarine
performance, I don't want to leave the impression
that some of us at Woods Hole knew more about
submarines than the operators. This was not the
case at all. What it amounted to... was that we
would sometimes talk some of their bosses into
getting some time so the submarine people could do
some tests, which many of them would like to have
done anyhow. What we tended to do was to systemize
the approach so that the things that were done
could come out with a little bit simpler thumb
rolls so the junior people could learn a little
faster. And what we felt was equally important,
that the senior people might be able to take these
same ground rules and, in cases of extremis, could
estimate a little further how far the design of
their boat and the constitution of the ocean would
permit them to go.
Getting back to Crossroads.
It was, in my way of thinking, a really wonderful
set of tests. And the fact that the vast majority of
the work was unclassified, that they had foreign
observers, and the fact that this information of
this new device got out into the world at large in a
quantitative fashion. I think the job of the
Defense Department and the Atomic Energy
Commission and so forth did in writing this
information up was really a great service to
mankind. I'm
not approving of the fact that it would be just as
nice if we didn't have the bomb, but that is a matter
of reality. It is very important that people know
what they have. Military people and civilians all
over the world realize they have a different kind
of beast than they had before.
In general, the tests out there were fairly
successful, the tests we were involved with. But
it was an opportunity to work with a good many
people. Some very simple instrumentation. We had
our one set of instrumentation at the bottom. Some
of you may notice, if you see the most common
picture of the underwater blast, showing this
great mushroom going up in the water, going up the
column of water, going up in the air, that in some of
these pictures, there's a pine, there's a palm
tree in the foreground. And on the palm tree, next
to the palm tree, there's a stepladder. And on the
palm tree, there are some tin cans nailed. These
are wave gauges in case the water got so high that it
went up over the land and tried to cover up the palm
tree.
Only reason I mention that is because we tried
there, as most of the field workers I have
acquainted with, whom I have great respect for,
know perfectly well that in the field almost
anything can happen. And one should aim an
experiment so that you get some kind of data almost
no matter how the experiment goes or what
particularly casually fate plays on you at the
moment.
Coming back to Woods Hole in the fall of 46, summer
of 46 after Crossroads,
there were several changes. One, Ewing had gone to
Columbia University with Warzel. A good many of
the wartime people were pulling out to bracket
Hersey, Columbus University, Columbus Island
got Brackett Hersey to come in and head up an
acoustics group, head up the acoustics group. At
that time, I believe I was listed as, started off as
a physicist. I think along about that time,
Columbus classified me as a physical
oceanographer. I suppose largely because I'd
been spending a lot of my time on physical
oceanography, but principally because he was
into the kind of work we were doing. He was a
physical oceanographer, and he probably thought
that the best work was done by physical
oceanographers. So he'd just put his little clan
and call them physical oceanographers.
Fritz Fuglester
was far more of a physical oceanographer and had
been. spending nearly all of his time on that kind
of thing, where I'd only been spending a
peripheral length of time. But on the other hand,
as
I indicated earlier, one of the relationships
that we had in jobs ahead was, how do you talk to
submarine people? How do you think about
oceanography and underwater sound on a global
basis, at least a Western Pacific basis?
About this time after Crossroads, Roger Revelle
left the Bureau of Ships and moved over to the newly
formed Office of Naval Research. It asked me if I
would take over his job in the Bureau of Ships.
This I did not want to do, but I said I would do it half
time.
My personal position was that I had just bought a
house only about 200 yards from the Oceanographic
Institution. I had the feeling that, well, I
really should solve the commuting problem. Then I
signed on for three years, spending every other
week in Washington, which shows you win some, you
lose some. Working in Washington was extremely
interesting, and I was very glad that I did it, and I
heartily recommend that many more people get a job
in Washington, also
particularly in the formative period of their
lives.
Roger was administering the bulk of oceanography
at that time in the country, And for a while there,
well, he was administering the bulk of
oceanography in the country. So for a while, I was
in this desk, was probably administering, in
fact, I think probably a higher percentage of the
funding of civilian oceanography than anybody
has since, because there wasn't much other. That
was that simple. Roger left. a great deal of
unfinished business about a whole file cabinet
full of unanswered correspondence. And the only
stipulation I made with Roger when I took the job
was that it would not be necessary for him to pass on
anything, that I would not have to wait for him to do
anything because he tended to be slow and
meticulous. I knew I'd never get through that
cabinet. This was no problem. Roger was a
wonderful person to deal with, and I spent a great
deal of time with him while he was in ONR.
The several things that I got out of that job was,
first, one thing.